A software person should know enough about hardware to write software easily but I confess I only recently figured out different types memory exist. Namely RAM and CPU cache.

Why both RAM and drive storage exist is an easier thing to understand although it was recently  made harder by the arrival of flash drives. RAM stands for random access memory . HDDs certainly are not random access but flash drives are. This is why HDD performance can be improved with defragging but not flash drives. Flash Drives are also refereed to as SSDs. One reason RAM has been faster than SSDs is because SSDs are non volatile where RAM is volatile. To make the memory in your computer stick when you shut it down requires a longer time to alter the hardware than something that is just influenced by the flow of current which inevitably stops when the computer is turned off.

Now on to CPU cache. It turns out the speed of light is not infinite. Therefore, the time it takes for information to travel is dependent on how far it has to go. In the case of computers this is current running along a conductive path. Given that there is also a minimum to the size of which manufacturers are capable of making small hardware, there is a delay between memory and computations on that memory. The more memory you are trying to access, the farther away it will potentially be because memory cells can only be packed so tightly together. Thus, if you work with a small amount of memory, provided your algorithm allows it, you can compute faster. CPU cache is made of smaller divisions of memory particularly for executing things fast. This often serves as a cache on information in RAM but CPU registers could also be considered a form of memory too. CPU caches come in different sizes for algorithms requiring more memory, namely L1, L2 cache etc. The smaller the level, the less memory is used and the faster your code can execute with.
